---
title: "Tuning: The Equal-Tempered Scale"
author: Gareth Loy
abstract: |
  These are extracts from sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.2.2, 3.13.4 of "Musimathics. The mathematical foundations of music, Vol 1." by Gareth Loy for a better understanding of the modern western scale of equal temperament. I'm thankful of the material provided by the author in this volume and I encourage the avid student who pursues the mathematical reasons of music to get the book too, as I'm sure it will expand on theoretical and historical foundations already cultivated. Isaac Medina
documentclass: scrarticle
papersize: letter
geometry: "left=3cm,right=3cm,top=2cm,bottom=2cm"
fontsize: 12pt
linestretch: 1.25
---

# Tuning: The Equal-Tempered Scale

## Equal-Tempered Interval

Modern Western instruments divide the octave into 12 equal-sized semitones. This system of tuning is called _equal temperament_ because the frequencies of all intervals are based on one uniform semitone interval.

We can use equation $f_x=f_R*2^x,x\in\mathbb{R}$, to compute the frequencies of the equal-tempered scale. For some reference frequency $f_R$, we obtain the frequency $f_k$ of any equal-tempered interval $k$ ($k= 0, 1, ..., 11$) within the first octave by computing

$$\begin{aligned}f_k=f_R*2^{k/12}\end{aligned}$$

For example, the pitch one semitone above $f_R=440Hz$ is $f_1=f_R*2^{1/12}\approx466.16Hz$. The size of the tempered semitone itself can be expressed as the ratio

$$\begin{aligned}\displaystyle\frac{2^{1/12}}{1}=\displaystyle\frac{\sqrt[12]{2}}{1}\approx1.0594631\end{aligned}$$

The nomenclature $\sqrt[x]{z}$ means the $x$th root of $z$, so $\sqrt[12]{2}$ is the twelfth root of 2.

## Equal-Tempering

While the equal-tempered scale takes the approach of tempering the fifth according to $2^{7/12}$, another equally valid approach is to shrink the semitone according to $\sqrt[12]{2}\approx1.0594631$, which is reasonably close to the minor second, $16/5=1.0666667$. The two approaches are equivalent, since the result either way is that the octave is divided into 12 equal intervals.

Curiously, this quintessentially Western scale appears to have been first invented in China. In 1596, Prince Chu Tsai-yu (or Zhu Zai-You) apparently calculated the degrees of the equal-tempered chromatic scale without benefit of logarithms (Barbour 1953; Kuttner 1975; Yasser 1932). However, it evidently did not catch on in China as it did in the West. The idea was apparently put forward first in Europe by Simon Stevin (1548-1620). The theory became widely known through the work of Mersenne (1635). But equal temperament did not become generally established in practice until 1800, first in Germany, later in England and France.

This table shows the conventional assignment of alphabetic letters to the frequencies of the equal-tempered scale. The table was generated by setting $f_R=440Hz$ and calculating the frequencies of all 12 values of $k$.

| Name  | Frequency in Hz ($f_R*2^{k/12}$) |
| ----- | -------------------------------- |
| A     | $f_R=440.000$                    | 
| A#,Bb | $f_R * 2^{(1/12)}=466.163$       |
| B     | $f_R * 2^{(2/12)}=493.883$       |
| C     | $f_R * 2^{(3/12)}=523.251$       |
| C#,Db | $f_R * 2^{(4/12)}=554.365$       |
| D     | $f_R * 2^{(5/12)}=587.329$       |
| D#,Eb | $f_R * 2^{(6/12)}=622.253$       |
| E     | $f_R * 2^{(7/12)}=659.255$       |
| F     | $f_R * 2^{(8/12)}=698.456$       |
| F#,Gb | $f_R * 2^{(9/12)}=739.988$       |
| G     | $f_R * 2^{(10/12)}=783.990$      |
| G#,Ab | $f_R * 2^{(11/12)}=830.609$      |
| A     | $f_R * 2^{(12/12)}=880.000$      |

## Interval Error of Equal-Tempered Tuning

Astonishingly, the equal-tempered intervals are close enough to the natural major scale that most Western composers and musicians from the 1800s to the present have been satisfied with the equal-tempered chromatic scale, and a very large body of music has been composed using it. Ironically, however, there is not a single small integer ratio left in the scale (apart from the unison and octave). Thus, one of the principal aims of early scale builders has been lost. Clearly, the desire for transposability won out over justness of intonation in Western music after the advent of tempered tunings.

But just how badly out of tune is equal temperament? The next table shows the size of the error in cents between each equal-tempered degree and its natural chromatic scale equivalent. The sign of each value in the Error column shows the cents by which the equal-tempered scale is sharp (positive) or flat (negative) with respect to its just equivalent. Note that the worst errors are for the minor and major thirds and sixths.

| Degree | Name           | Error   |
| ------ | -------------- | ------- |
| 1      | Unison         | 0.0     |
| 2      | Minor second   | -11.731 |
| 3      | Major second   | -3.910  |
| 4      | Minor third    | -15.641 |
| 5      | Major third    | 13.686  |
| 6      | Perfect fourth | 1.955   |
| 7      | Tritone        | -9.7763 |
| 8      | Perfect fifth  | -1.955  |
| 9      | Minor sixth    | -13.686 |
| 10     | Major sixth    | 15.641  |
| 11     | Minor seventh  | 3.910   |
| 12     | Major seventh  | 11.730  | 

We can get a crude quantitative idea of how closely aligned these two scales are by adding the magnitudes of the Error column. Doing so shows that the sum total by which all tempered intervals miss their natural chromatic scale equivalents is 103.624 cents. Is 103.624 cents accumulated error good or bad? Are these differences significant?

---
Tags: #musictheory